Good afternoon and
welcome to session 508,
Audio Units and Audio Codecs.
I'm Craig Keithley.
I'm Apple's USB and FireWire evangelist.
Today we're going to talk about
Audio Units and Audio Codecs in Mac OS X.
And Audio Units are very cool.
They provide a way by which you can
create a graph of processing units
where you can connect together a bunch
of discrete -- I'll even say digital
signal processing elements and process
a signal through this graph in a nice,
timely, time-synchronized manner.
So to talk about that,
let's bring up Jeff Moore,
Core Audio Engineering.
In contrast to what Craig just said,
I'm going to talk a little
bit about the Audio Codec API.
Audio Codecs are a new feature to Jaguar.
They exist to plug into the
Audio Converter to allow for more
formats converting to and from
all sorts of different stuff.
Audio Codecs are
basically a component API,
just like Audio Units are.
They obviously have different
selectors than Audio Units,
but they have the same basic layout.
In Jaguar, like I said,
the Audio Convertor is going
to use Audio Codecs as its
extendability mechanism.
There are three basic kinds
of Audio Codec components.
There are encoders,
which transform linear PCM data
into some other format.
There are decoders,
which translate that other
format back into linear PCM.
Then there are Unity Codecs,
which transform between
variants of the same format.
An example of that would
be an inter-float converter
or a sample rate converter.
Audio Codecs are being components.
They're discovered just like
any other kind of component.
You use component manager routines.
In particular,
you will use Find X Component
to iterate through the list of
different kinds of components.
Then once you find one that
you're interested in using,
you can open a component on
it to get an instance of it.
Then when you're done,
you just call Close Component
and it will go away.
The Audio Codecs also have properties
like most of the other core audio APIs,
and they provide you a way to
configure the transformation
being performed by the codec.
Like other properties,
the value of the property is an untyped
block of memory whose contents are
agreed upon by the property's ID.
Some of the important properties
for Codecs are the Requires
Packet Description property,
which says that the format you're
dealing with requires external
packetization information to describe
how the data is broken up in the buffer.
Then you have the Packet Frame Size,
which tells you how many frames are in
a given packet of data for this format.
Then you have the Variable
Packet Byte Sizes property,
which tells you whether or not the number
of bytes in each packet is going to vary.
This will be the case for
variable bitrate formats like AC3,
AAC, MP3, what have you.
Then there's another property that
tells you how big a packet is ever
going to get for a given format.
That's the Maximum Packet
Byte Size property.
Some more important properties that
allow you to configure the rough
translation between that you're doing.
You can set the input and output format.
This is important.
You may think that sounds a little weird.
If you have some codecs will
support outputting 16-bit
integer and floating point,
you might want to choose between them.
You may want to choose other
aspects about the formats.
The codecs will also provide
a list of what formats they
support in each direction.
Then you also have the
Magic Cookie property.
The Magic Cookie property
provides an untyped block of data
that is private to its format.
It's there to provide out-of-band
configuration information about the
transformation that you're about to do.
Most advanced codecs need to have
this information supplied before
they can do any useful work.
Audio Codecs operate in two states.
They can be initialized or uninitialized.
You can move between these states
using the Audio Codec initialized and
Audio Codec uninitialized routines.
The difference between the two states is
that when a codec becomes initialized,
that's a signal to the codec that it's
going to lock down the transformation
it's going to do and allocate all its
buffers that it needs and load any
tables that it needs to do its job.
This is important because
from that point on,
until you uninitialize the codec,
you can't change anything
about the transformation that
the codec is going to do.
So there are also properties that
will only be able to be known when
you have initialized the codec.
A good example is the
maximum packet byte size.
You can only really ever know
that once you've determined
what the input format is,
and you've supplied the
magic cookie for that format,
and then the codec has enough
information in its possession to say,
okay, the packets is never going to get
any bigger than X number of bytes.
And so you won't be able to find
that information out until you
actually initialize the codec.
To move data through the codecs,
the codecs use a push
and then pull model.
Input data is provided to the codec
using Audio Codec Append Input Data.
The input data is then copied into
an internal buffer of the codec.
The codec will also return how much data
it has consumed from your input buffer.
You have to supply whole
packets of information,
not partial packets,
if external packet descriptions
are required for a format.
A very important format for that
that requires packet descriptions
is MPEG-4 formats like AAC.
To get data back out of the codec,
you use Audio Codec
Produce Output Packets.
Output is always produced
in full packets of data.
You can't get partial packets.
Most codecs just don't have the
capability to cache the data or
partially process partial input packets.
Audio Codec Produce Output Packets
will also return a status value to
tell you a little bit about what's
going on internally in the codec,
so that you can know whether or
not you need to feed it more data
or whether it has enough data to
keep pulling out more packets.
We provide an SDK for building
Audio Codec components.
It provides a C++ class library.
I'm going to show you a little
around that SDK here in a second.
Could I have demo four,
So the Audio Codec SDK is provided,
you know, it's just a set of C++ classes.
The important,
and since it's a component,
since the actual packaging
of the codec is done as a
It's done as a component.
The SDK implements all the
nitty-gritty of dealing with
the component aspect of things,
and you can just override a
few methods here and there.
It's very similar to the way
the Audio Unit SDK is laid out.
You have a base class that provides
the abstraction points of all
the routines in the Codec API.
As you can see,
there just really isn't a whole heck
of a lot of routines in the Codec API.
You have the property routines.
You have initialize and uninitialize.
You have append input data
and produce output packets.
Then you have the reset routine,
which allows you to reset
the codec's internal state.
You can also reset and clear all
its internal buffering to begin
processing a new stream of data.
Then the Codecs,
there are further specializations of
the AC Codec base class that provide
different levels of implementation.
The first one is the AC Base Codec class.
It goes about its job by just
providing the raw mechanisms
necessary to manage things like
the input and output format lists,
as well as dealing with the
management of the magic cookie.
It also will further break out the
properties into individual virtual
methods that you can override to make
it easier to implement this stuff.
Then the final base class that's
provided is AC Simple Codec.
And AC Simple Codec goes the
extra mile of providing some
primitive buffer handling.
It implements a ring buffer
for input and provides routines
for managing this ring buffer.
And then in your subclass of this,
you would override the other
routines and use these routines
to actually access the input data.
The SDK will come with
a couple of preliminary
implementations of some codecs.
The one I have up here is an IMA codec.
IMA4 is a pretty common codec.
It's reasonable in quality.
It's mildly lossy.
The way the IMA codecs are brought
up is they have a base codec
class that wraps up all the common
tables and the management of the
channel statelist that is needed
to do IMA encoding and decoding.
Then there are individual subclasses
to implement a decoder and an encoder.
This is the header file
for the encoder class.
As you can see,
it doesn't really have a whole lot to do.
It provides,
it overrides the routine to figure out
when someone changes the input format and
when someone changes the output format.
It also overrides produce output packets
so that it can handle the encoding.
Then IMA, this implementation of IMA is
based... uses a static routine to
actually do the signal processing.
I want to go through, just quickly,
the produce output packets routine to
give you a feel for what you're going
to have to do to implement a codec.
The first thing to note is that the
codec has to be initialized before
you can call produce output packets.
You have to check,
make sure that you're in the right
state before you can do anything.
If it's not, we throw an exception here.
Since this is a C++ framework,
all the exceptions are caught
up at the component layer.
Error codes are produced based on that.
In the codec,
once you know you're initialized,
you've got to go figure
out how many packets are
available in the input buffer.
The IMA encoder is based off
of the simple codec class,
so it's using the ring buffer
routines in its base class to figure
out how big its input buffer is.
Now, this codec is built to take only
a 16-bit integer as its input,
because that's what the
IMA algorithm is defined to do.
So then, once it figures out
where its input data is,
and how much is there,
and whether or not there's
actually enough input data that
we can produce an output packet,
we find out how many packets the
client has asked us to produce,
and then we go through,
we set a few things up,
and then we end up calling the
encode channel routine that just
steps through each buffer and
encodes each channel individually.
Not the most efficient algorithm,
but it does the job.
and the ENCODE channel is
a pretty involved routine,
and the IMA algorithm is available
from the IMA website for those
that are interested in it.
That's pretty much all
there is to the Codec SDK.
Next,
I'd like to bring up Doug Wyatt again.
He's going to talk more about
Audio Units and everything that's
new and wonderful about writing them.
Doug Wyatt: Thanks, Jeff.
Okay, in this section of the session,
I'm going to talk about Audio Units.
and I will be talking about what they do,
how they're packaged,
and although we'll touch on some uses
of Audio Units from the client side,
I'm going to focus in on writing a
simple Audio Unit and an Audio Unit view,
which is a new feature
we have for Jaguar,
a user interface component
for an Audio Unit.
So just to review for those of you
who haven't looked at Audio Units yet,
the basic functionality,
its purpose is to provide
some nice little modular piece
of audio signal processing.
It can have an associated view plug-in,
a user interface for editing it.
An Audio Unit can be connected to
other Audio Units with any number of
input and output buses or connections.
Audio Units use a pull model
when they're connected together,
meaning that if you've got
a chain of Audio Units,
you pull on the bottom one,
which will then pull on
the one above it for input,
and so on up the chain
until the input is obtained.
And then from there,
it processes its output.
And that's how AUGraph works.
Audio Units operate on 32-bit floating
point numbers as the canonical format.
It is theoretically possible
to write Audio Units that
operate on other data formats,
but there's no guarantee that you'll
be able to connect such Audio Units
with any other Audio Units since
32-bit float is the canonical format.
As Jeff was just mentioning,
we do use the Component
Manager for packaging
Audio Units for various reasons,
including our
responsibilities to QuickTime.
And it's funny because I've
talked to developers about how
we use the Component Manager,
and there's some really major
developers who've never used
it and don't know how it works.
And we're very pleasantly just
surprised to find out there's
really only three functions they
need to know in order to use it:
find a component,
open -- find next component,
open a component, and close component.
So once you've opened
the Audio Unit component,
then you're free to issue,
from the client point of view,
you're free to make
calls on the Audio Unit,
like initialize, setting properties,
and so on.
So from here on,
I'm going to focus on the
process of writing an Audio Unit.
The first thing you'll want to
think about is how many input and
output buses your Audio Unit needs.
It's important to bear in mind
that when we talk about a bus,
it can actually be a multichannel bus.
In 10.1, if there is a multichannel bus,
we're using interleaved formats.
But we are working on a version 2
audio unit specification in which
multichannel buses are represented
as an array of deinterleaved buffers.
And I'll be explaining
more about that later.
In any case,
the other first step in the API when you
want to begin writing an Audio Unit is to
look through our base classes in our SDK,
because we have a fairly
wide variety of them,
and see if you can find one that
gives you the most leverage for free.
So these are the main
base classes in our SDK,
and I'll be talking about each of them
At the root of the class
hierarchy is AUBase,
and its main job is just to translate the
component entry selectors and get and set
property calls into C++ virtual methods.
These virtual methods have,
in many cases, default implementations by
many of the base classes,
but of course,
since they are virtual methods,
you're free to override them
to customize the behavior.
They manage AU Scopes and AU Elements,
which are objects that correspond
to the scope and element concepts
that you'll see in the API.
For instance,
whenever you set an Audio Unit parameter,
you have to say which parameter
in which scope in which element.
An element is simply a bus
number when you're talking about
the input or the output scope.
So you might be talking about
parameter three in the input
scope element number zero,
for instance.
And AUBase also handles a
lot of other housekeeping,
as I said,
providing default implementations for
the somewhat elaborate Audio Unit API.
But as we'll see in the example later on,
that housekeeping that happens
in the base class for you makes
it so that your actual signal
processing code can be very simple.
Okay, working our way down
in the class hierarchy,
the first subclass of AUBase that
we'll talk about is AUEffectBase.
This may be a little
simplistic for some algorithms,
but for a lot of algorithms
it's perfectly useful.
It assumes one input
bus and one output bus,
and that they each have the
same number of channels.
The effect I'm going to show
you later is a multi-tap delay,
and it's implemented as an AUEffectBase.
And the way it works,
AUEffectBase issues a virtual
method call asking your derived
class to create what we call
DSP kernel object for each channel.
So if it's a stereo,
if your effect is invoked
in a stereo context,
the base class will ask your subclass
to create two kernel objects,
one to process each channel.
And so then when it comes time for
your Audio Unit to render its audio,
the base class can simply call
your two kernel objects separately,
passing pointers to
mono buffers to process.
And so that way you can write your
DSP code for algorithms where there
isn't any relationships between what's
happening in the different channels.
You can write your DSP code to
work in mono or stereo or five
channel or whatever context.
A slight specialization of
AU Effect Base is AU Inline Effect Base.
And this just adds a small optimization.
It pulls its input samples into the
same buffer into which your output
samples are going to be rendered.
So it's assuming that you're going
to process your samples in place,
as you can in many algorithms,
and this is obviously a much
better thing to do to the cache
when you're doing real-time DSP.
Okay,
moving on to another subclass of AUBase.
We have AUConverterBase.
In our session on Tuesday,
we talked a bit about
the Audio Converter.
Jeff was just describing
the Audio Codecs,
which are plug-ins into
the Audio Converter.
So the job of the AU Converter
base is simply to wrap up one of
our Audio Converter objects in
such a way that it can be used in
the middle of an Audio Unit chain.
So the emphasis -- the usefulness
of the Audio Converter is a bit
different in the world of Audio Units.
There don't tend to be many
needs for format conversions,
except in some special cases,
which I'll get to in a minute.
But in the middle of a chain,
you'll probably only be using it for
things like doing sample rate conversion,
deinterleaving and interleaving,
and channel mapping,
which means adding or removing
channels or rearranging the order
of channels like you may have to do
sometimes with multichannel formats.
Deriving from AU Converter Base,
we have AU Output Base,
which we use internally as the base
class for all of our output units.
Output units have some
extra virtual methods,
start and stop.
Those are also component
selectors for output units.
For hardware output units it's
obvious start and stop mean
start and stop the hardware.
You could write a audio output
unit deriving from AU output base
that wrote audio to an audio file,
and you might use the start
and stop methods as the place
where you would open the file,
prepare it, set up the header,
and when you close the
file in the stop method,
then you could fix up the chunk
sizes and whatnot that you have
to do when writing AIFF files,
for example.
The one other thing that's really useful
about the output unit is that since
it derives from AU Converter Base,
it gives you very easy
access to format conversions.
There are a number of different
ways you could use this.
For instance, if your application is just
generating audio from -- maybe
it's playing an integer audio file,
you can set up the output audio
unit to accept integer input.
Just say, okay, my input stream format
is 16-bit stereo integer.
And by doing that,
the AU output base will automatically
insert a converter into the chain,
converting that integer format into
the floating point file format,
or data format,
which is typically required by the HAL.
And conversely,
if your output unit is running
from AU Converter Base,
it will automatically convert
that data format into a file.
So that's one way to do it.
The other way is writing to
a file in an integer format.
You might be receiving your
samples from another Audio Unit,
which is generating float,
and your file format
will probably be integer.
And so the converter that's built
into the output unit can perform
that conversion for you with your
having to do almost no work at all.
It's all handled in the base class and
how your clients set the input and output
stream formats for your Audio Unit.
Okay, another subclass of AE base
is music device base,
and this one is fairly substantial
and separate because music device is a
completely separate type of component.
It's based on audio unit,
but it has a large number
of extra selectors,
allowing you to control the audio unit
by sending it MIDI events and what we
call extended note and control events.
For example,
our extended note events allow you
to specify pitch more precisely
than with 127 MIDI note numbers.
You can specify fractional
pitches and so on.
The Music Device, though,
is an Audio Unit,
since that's what it derives from.
So it renders audio just
like any other Audio Unit.
You make the same calls to
it to have it render audio.
And so you can plug it
into chains of Audio Units.
And we see it as a really good
way for people to implement
software synthesizers.
In the system,
we have our own downloadable sample
software synthesizer built in.
You'll see it as a music device.
And I forget its signature offhand,
its component ID,
but it's in the header files.
You'll see it there.
Okay, so the AU base class,
returning back to the top
of the class hierarchy,
it manages some other objects
called AU Scope and AU Element.
As I mentioned before, in our API,
we talk about parameters as
existing within elements of scopes.
And so these objects are where
the parameter values are stored.
You can subclass these objects if you
want to store any additional state per
input or output bus in your Audio Unit.
The other thing they do is manage
the stream formats for your
Audio Unit's inputs and outputs.
There are variables there that say, okay,
this is the current stream
format for input number one,
and that lets us do all
of the format negotiation.
Well, a lot of the format negotiation,
your subclass has many
ways it can hook into that,
but when you're connecting
two Audio Units,
that format negotiation is
handled largely by the base class.
AU Element has a subclass,
AU Input Element,
which obviously operates
on your input buses.
Its main job is to obtain
your incoming audio data,
whether it's from an upstream audio unit
or a client-supplied callback function.
And we also have AU Output Element,
and its main job is to -- or
specialization of AU Element,
I should say -- is to maintain
some buffers into which that
output's audio is rendered.
And there's some reasons -- if you've
looked at some of our audio code,
you'll notice that we do
support fan-out connections,
meaning one audio unit can be connected
to two extra audio units in a chain.
And in order to support that,
we provide a way for
an AU Output Element,
a cache by which,
when the first destination
unit pulls and says,
"Hey, give me your audio," it gets
rendered into this cache buffer
so that when the second one asks,
"Hey, give me your audio," it's
already been rendered,
and that cached audio
can just be passed back.
So having reviewed the
basic concepts in the API,
I'd like to go over to machine five here.
is hopefully awake.
Okay, it's awake now.
Clean up after the previous session.
And I'd like to just walk you
through the process of writing a
simple multi-tap delay audio unit.
In Jeff's session,
Jeff's portion of this session,
he showed a lot of the
implementation of the base classes,
but unfortunately there's a lot
of code in the base classes.
So I've just given you an overview
of what they are and what they do,
and you can explore them in
more detail and ask us questions
about them on the API list.
But right now I'd like to just focus on
how little code is actually necessary
to create a functioning audio unit.
The Audio Unit I chose to wrote,
since I'm not a great
DSP programmer by any means,
is just a simple multi-tap delay.
It derives from AU Effect Base.
I'm going to close this.
The first thing I'd actually
like to look at is since we
are writing a component here,
we do have to provide the component
manager with a few resources
in order to find our component.
And when I came to Apple,
this process confused
me enough that I said,
"Okay,
I just want to have a really easy way to
do this." And so by defining about eight
macros here and then including this file,
which contains the magic,
I get the three or four resources
that are necessary to define my
Audio Unit component and in such a way
that the component manager will find it.
So the other little bit of component
manager magic is all encapsulated
into this one macro here,
component entry.
What this expands into is the single
function entry into your component,
which we'll call a dispatch function
for all the component entry selectors,
and that's where the translation
of all those component entries
into C++ virtual methods is made.
The next thing I'd like to show you here.
So the one virtual method that's really
important and required to be override
in AU Effect Base is new kernel.
As you remember,
the kernel object is what gets called by
the base class to process each channel
in a stereo or multichannel situation.
So I'm simply,
when asked to create a kernel,
I'm creating an instance
of a multi-tap kernel.
Which is another class in this file here.
These properties we don't
need to look at right now.
They play into the UI.
And here's the MultiTap Kernel Class.
And it's just maintaining a
little bit of state per channel,
like the maximum number
of frames of delay.
We've got a five-second
maximum delay time,
and so I'm translating that into
some number of sample frames.
I'm allocating a buffer
for the number of delays,
and I'm initializing some state
as to how I'm using that buffer
as a ring buffer for the delay.
While we're looking at the kernel,
its processing function gets called with
a pointer to a source buffer of samples,
a pointer to a destination
number of samples,
a number of frames to process,
and here's the trick by which we can
make this one function work with both
interleaved and deinterleaved data.
We're told how many interleaved channels
are in the input and output streams.
So if it's stereo interleaved,
in-num channels will be two,
and we'll be expected to go skipping
through the samples two at a time,
both on source and input.
And we recognize this isn't the
most efficient way to do things,
and I'll be discussing more
about interleaved versus
deinterleaved issues later.
But this is how it works for interleaved.
And so at processing time,
we just do a little work to look
up the parameters of the delay.
The first parameter -- actually,
I've scrolled down too far.
The first parameter -- no, I haven't.
Okay, first we're looking --
this is a five-tap delay,
and for each delay tap,
we just have a level and a delay time.
So we're issuing these methods on --
which are implemented in the base class.
Give me this parameter by its number.
We're finding out the delay time,
which is converting a
percentage to a ratio.
And here we're finding out what
the delay time corresponds --
which is in seconds -- corresponds
to in terms of number of samples,
limiting it.
This is all pretty
straightforward DSP code.
As we go through the input buffer,
we're writing the incoming
data to the delay line.
We're saving a fraction of the
input sample as our dry signal.
Then we're walking through the five
delay taps and mixing from each
delay tap into the output signal.
So that's the DSP code.
I think there's only about one
more function in here I'd like
to show you at this point,
which is get parameter info.
So far we've seen pretty much
everything that we needed to do.
Actually, I did forget one thing.
The constructor of the MultiTapAU,
which is the Audio Unit base class,
here's where we have to
initialize the parameters,
because if we don't do this here,
the parameters won't exist,
and when we go later to find
out what their values are,
we'll miss them.
Here we see what the parameters are.
There's the wet/dry mix,
and for each of the five taps,
there's a delay time and a level.
This call to create elements simply
makes sure that the scope in which
I'm creating these parameters exists
before I try to create the parameters.
Okay, so that's the DSP side
of this Audio Unit.
That's all there is to it.
There's a few more things that
are all user interface related.
One method that we have to
override is Get Parameter Info
so that a generic user interface,
which is how I'm going to
show this audio unit first,
so that a generic interface can know
what the parameters are and what their
ranges are and what their units are.
And so here in Get Parameter Info,
our caller is specifying
the parameter and scope,
and we're passing it back this
Audio Unit Parameter Info structure.
And since we only actually
have three parameters here,
this is a short function.
We have the dry/wet mix,
which goes from 0 to 100%. We have,
for each of the five taps, a delay time.
and the level.
And so this function here,
This is all that the generic
Audio Unit view will need in order to
Work with our Audio Unit.
So I've built this -- I'm
not going to take the time
to compile it all right now,
but I've built this Audio Unit into
a component bundle and I've installed
it into system library components.
And I have a test application.
How are we doing for time?
Should I go through the test
step in a bit of detail?
Yeah, I'll just show you quickly,
because it shows off
some of our other APIs.
So it'll help you understand what's
going on when you hear the program,
too.
What this program does is
create an Audio Unit graph.
which connects a DLS software synthesizer
to the multi-tap delay that I just wrote.
And from that, we go straight to the
default audio output unit.
This bit of code here creates
nodes in the graph for those three
components that get specified
by their component descriptions.
Having created the nodes,
then we just establish connections
between them from the synth to the delay,
and then from the delay
to the output node.
We open the graph, we initialize it.
And then we call getNodeInfo to get from
the AU graph structure to the actual
audio unit that we're going to talk to.
For instance,
we're going to send notes to the synth,
we're going to send parameter
changes to the delay.
I don't know if there's a reason
why I'm hanging on to the output.
Probably none.
But in any case, we've built the graph.
It's all connected and it's ready to run.
And it's doing DSP at this point,
except that nobody's actually
generating any audio.
We've got a synthesizer and
nobody's controlling it.
So another function in here.
This is just a quick whirlwind tour of
the music sequencing APIs and how you
can build up songs to play on the fly.
I create a music sequence object.
I get its tempo track.
I set its tempo.
At time zero,
the tempo is 120 beats per minute.
Then I add a track into which I'm
going to add all of my other events.
On MIDI Channel 0,
I'm going to have a piano sound
with a program change message.
On MIDI Channel 1,
I've got an electric piano.
I'm going to pan channel one
hard left and pan channel two
hard right so that you can really
hear for sure that this effect is
operating in total stereo manner.
And then I'm going to
randomly generate some notes.
And although I kind of
like totally random notes,
I actually made this less random.
I'm generating arpeggios,
which are in various keys.
But that's what this loop is doing.
It's just generating some nice pretty
patterns of notes and adding the events
to the music track that we created.
So now we've got a
sequence full of notes,
program change at the beginning, pan.
Then I can connect the
sequence to the graph of audio
units that I created earlier.
I can assign this track
full of MIDI events to the
synthesizer node in that graph.
I can create a music player object.
Then I assign that player to play
the sequence I've just created.
And then, boom,
I call MusicPlayerStart and I hear noise.
So let's see what that sounds like.
So we can hear,
this is just the dry sound.
Do you want it louder?
OK.
Can you hear it OK?
So we don't have my effect,
well we do have my effect
in the signal chain.
Here's the generic view for the effect.
You can see that the level
on all five taps is zero.
So let's get some delays going.
Okay, so that's how easy it was to create
an Audio Unit to do a multi-tap delay
with the generic user interface.
Back to the slides, please.
So a little later I'll show you how I've
created a custom user interface for that,
but first I've left some other loose
ends that we should cover first.
There's been some concern about the way
we've been using interleaved data as
our canonical format within Audio Units.
We went to a developer kitchen
a couple of months ago,
and the majority of the room
told us they'd really rather
be working in deinterleaved
data instead of interleaved.
So,
And we have some other things we want
to do to solidify and clarify the specs.
We're going to work towards a version
2 specification of the Audio Unit API.
The main two differences being
that we're going to change the
way we describe the components,
and we're going to have to pass
a different data structure to
support the interleaved buffers.
The component description
differences in the version 1 API,
as we've shipped in 10.1,
we use the AUNT component type,
and we also enforce the use
of certain component subtypes.
We got some feedback that we were
taking up 64 out of the 96 bits
available for describing a component.
So in the version 2 API,
we're only going to use
the component's type,
AUFX, for instance, instead of AUNTEFCT.
And we'll leave the manufacturer and
subtype available for developers.
As for the differences in the
rendering part of your code,
as I mentioned, in the version one API,
we're using interleaved buffers anywhere
you've got a multichannel stream.
An interleaved buffer can fit
into our audio buffer structure.
But in the version 2 API,
in order to support
deinterleaved buffers,
we need to use a
different data structure,
which is an audio buffer list.
Fortunately,
this isn't too traumatic a change,
because an audio buffer list
has already been defined to be
an array of an audio buffer.
These are data structures that
are in the HAL API as well
as being used by Audio Units.
I'll go into the details
of this a bit later on,
but the main changes are
that the render slice,
Audio Unit render slice
becomes Audio Unit render,
and there's some callback functions
from the Audio Unit that are
going to change accordingly.
And just to reiterate why we're
making this somewhat dramatic change,
It seemed like developers
really wanted us to do this.
Better to do it sooner than later,
after there are even more audio
units written in the world.
It seems like a lot of people's
DSP code that they've already written,
this may be partially due to VST,
but there's probably also
some cache efficiency reasons.
A lot of existing code
uses deinterleaved buffers,
and we respect that and want to
make that the canonical format.
And it does offer us some optimization
opportunities when we're munging channels
around in multi-channel situations.
So for you as the potential
author of an Audio Unit,
here are some implications
of those changes.
You may have a reason to
support the version 1 API if
you need to ship on Mac OS 10.1,
if you want to depend on the
Audio Units that we shipped on 10.1.
But at some point after Jaguar,
any new Audio Units that
Apple ships will only be published
with the new component type.
which means they only
support the new API.
But in order to make this
transition as painless as possible,
we're going to do as much as we can
to make it possible to write one
Audio Unit that conforms to both APIs.
And the way we can do this is by
having a couple of different ways.
telling you how to use component
aliases to tell the component
manager there's two components here,
but actually those two components
point to the same piece of code,
which is your Audio Unit.
And that piece of code can
find out which component
description was used to open it,
and from there it can know, okay,
I'm being expected to operate in
version one versus version two mode.
The other thing we can do,
we can do a lot of work in our base
classes to hide the differences.
Our current SDK doesn't support this,
but we're very close to being done with
the new SDK where essentially everything
is being done with version 2 in mind and
version 1 is being implemented as -- the
old version 1 calls are being implemented
in terms of the new version 2 ones.
And since the audio buffer list and
audio buffer structures are so similar,
that turned out to be not too much work.
And in fact, if you derive from
AU Effect Base or AU Converter Base,
the change may be completely
transparent to you because these
details of interleaving and
deinterleaving are happening on the
base classes below you or above you,
depending upon how you look
at the class hierarchy.
From the client point of view,
you can't mix the version one and
version two types in an audio unit graph.
It would just be too difficult
to assume that any given,
well, if that audio unit had
both personalities,
you would see it as a version, you know,
you'd be able to see, okay,
I've got two version two units
here that I can connect up.
But if you connect up a version
one to a version two unit,
you would almost certainly
get a stream format mismatch.
One of them would be saying, hey,
I want the interleaved input,
and the other one would be saying, hey,
I'm providing interleaved output.
You may be able to insert a
converter to get around that,
but in the AU graph API,
we're going to be strict about
that and just not permit it.
From the client point of view,
you'll see the changes to use
the Audio Buffer list instead
of the Audio Buffer in your
callbacks from the Audio Units.
And you'll be using the
Audio Unit Render and Audio Unit Render,
instead of Audio Unit Render Slice.
Okay, moving back on towards
the world of Audio Unit
Graphic User Interfaces.
We have a new component type
called Audio Unit Carbon View,
which wraps up an entire user interface
for an Audio Unit into a component also.
We have a generic View component,
which I just showed you.
It essentially just interrogates all of
the Audio Unit parameters in the global
scope and shows them one after another.
But we have defined a property for
the Audio Unit to tell its host,
here are the component descriptions,
there can be one or more,
for the view components
that know how to edit me.
And I'll show you that in
my sample unit in a moment.
So what the Audio Unit Carbon View does,
its job is simply to
create a Carbon User Pane,
which can be embedded anywhere
in the host application's window.
That User Pane,
I think it's a Carbon term for
just a view container of some sort.
That view can contain either
more Carbon controls or
a completely custom UI.
It's completely up to you as
long as you use Carbon events to
receive your events from the OS.
We didn't want to get into
any of the messiness of OS 9
and the way that applications,
for instance,
VST hosts would have to dispatch
mouse and keyboard events and window
up to -- I don't know what else.
But a lot of plug-in models, you know,
people had to,
in their host applications,
manually dispatch events from the
operating system to the plug-in.
But if you use Carbon events,
the plug-in can just get those
messages directly from the OS,
and things are just wonderfully
simple by comparison to OS 9.
And similarly to both the Audio Codec
SDK and the Audio Unit SDK,
for Audio Unit Carbon views,
we're -- we're going to be
using a lot of different things.
We're going to supply a small
C++ framework to make it as
simple as possible for you
to write these components.
Those of you who use Cocoa may be asking,
"Well, so what about us?
Why not an Audio Unit Cocoa view?"
There are a lot of tricky issues
in mixing Carbon and Cocoa.
There are some directions
in which it already works.
There are others in which it doesn't.
And we really want to make this
as transparent as possible.
So we can't commit to that, to Jaguar,
but we are very aware that there
are people who want to write
their user interfaces in Cocoa,
and we're going to find a way
to make it work if we can.
So moving back to the
Carbon View component,
the base class, AU Carbon View Base,
all it really has to do is handle
the one component selector,
which is open yourself, in effect,
although it has a lot of parameters.
So the component gets told,
here's your component reference,
which is in view.
It's getting told the Audio Unit it's
being expected to control.
It's being told the window into which
it's going to build its UI and the
parent control within that window.
These are all Carbon terms.
The parent control might typically
be the window's root control,
and we'll see that in the sample program.
That's how I'm doing things.
The host application is providing
a location and requested
size for your view component,
but the size is actually
only a suggestion.
If the host says, well,
you can be 200 by 300 pixels wide,
and you say, no,
I want to be 400 by 800 pixels in size,
you're free to make yourself
as large as you want.
That's just the host's request,
because he's actually free to go back and
make you smaller afterwards or embed you
inside scroll bars or whatever he wants.
Or he could be really nice and say, okay,
he's going to be 400 by 800.
I'm going to give him the whole
window and make the window that size.
So the last argument there is the
user pane which the plugin creates,
the view component creates,
and returns to the host.
The other main function
provided by AU Carbon Base,
or Carbon View Base, our base class,
is to manage the connecting
of controls to parameters.
And the mechanism by which it does
that we call Parameter Listeners.
And this is our way of making it
possible for multiple pieces of software
that are all working with the same
Audio Unit to be aware of changes that
the others make to the parameter values.
For instance, you might have -- I can
think of a lot of examples.
You might have two views on the screen,
two different user interfaces
for the same Audio Unit.
And they could -- one of them could
be moving the slider -- actually,
I'll show you this in my program.
Moving the slider in one will
make the slider move in the other.
Your program might be
automating the Audio Unit,
and then the user interface
wants to reflect those changes.
There's a lot of possibilities here.
We've created a centralized
dispatch mechanism called
the AU Parameter Listener.
All that you have to do from the
point of view of when you change
parameters is to call AU Parameter Set,
which goes through this
notification mechanism,
instead of going directly
to Audio Unit Set Parameter.
And you can set up one listener to
listen to any number of parameters.
In our view components, for instance,
there's just one listener,
and it listens to all of
the parameters in that view.
And for more details,
you can look at our new, for Jaguar,
header file, AudioUnitUtilities.h.
So with that, I'm getting low on time,
so I'm going to put -- actually,
writing a Carbon view
is also pretty simple.
I'm going to show you how to write one.
I'm in the wrong program, no wonder.
Wrong project.
Okay.
Okay,
so this is the custom user interface for
the multi-tap delay I showed you earlier.
It derives from AU Carbon Base,
which I was just telling you about,
and it only has to override one
virtual method called Create UI.
It has the same magic macro to
create a component dispatcher for me.
And then this is just a bunch of
kind of tedious Carbon UI code to
manually create controls on the fly.
This C++ object specifies the
parameter in terms of its Audio Unit,
parameter ID, scope, and element number.
I create a static text control,
which is the name of the parameter.
and Jeff Moore: Thank you, Jeff.
Thank you, Jeff.
Thank you.
And then the SDK has this handy
little utility function that will,
for one parameter,
create a slider with labels on both ends
and an edit text field over to the side
and connect them all up to one parameter.
And so here that's where I'm creating the
controls for the wet/dry mix parameter.
And then, as you remember,
this multi-tap delay has five taps.
So for each of the five taps,
I go through this loop,
and I do the same process of specifying
the Audio Unit parameter scope element,
make a rectangle,
and again call this function to create a
labeled slider with an edit text field.
Basically, I'm just building a bunch of
Carbon controls on the fly.
I'm making a lot of use of some
utility functions here to do that.
You can look at the details
of how that works in the SDK.
Then the last thing I have to do
when I'm done is just make sure that
the Carbon pane that I've created
is big enough to enclose all of
the controls that I've created.
The base class,
as you create those controls,
keeps track of which one went
furthest right and which one
went furthest to the bottom.
Those are stored in this member variable,
mbottomright.
Just by adding a little bit of
slop here so that there's space
at the bottom right of the window,
I can set my custom view to a nice size.
So this is all the code for the
custom UI for the MultiTap AUView,
other than the code that
we provide in the SDK.
Now let's look at that.
This isn't actually any more
beautiful than the generic view,
but it is a little more nicely organized.
You can see how the parameter
listener mechanism is working here.
These two views,
when I change a parameter in one,
it's changing in the other.
[Transcript missing]
So just to wrap up here,
I realize that the transition to
the Audio Unit version 2 API may be
causing you some questions and concern.
I'd like to reemphasize that we're
going to do everything we can in
the base classes in the SDK to
make sure that those classes
support both versions of the API.
So you can start working on
learning your way around the
SDK without fear of things changing
drastically underneath you later.
And I'd like to really thank all
the developers who've been giving
us feedback all along because it
helps us know when we're doing the
right thing and that feels good,
and it helps us know when we're
doing the bad thing and it feels good
to be able to do the right thing.
So thanks again for your feedback,
and please keep giving
it to us on our API list,
and thank you very much.